docs(serve): add FunASR ASR integration example (#64053)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/serve/tutorials/funasr-asr.md

> ---
> orphan: true
> ---

Reviewer: The style guide asks every page to carry a `description` in its MyST `html_meta` front matter, which search results and the social preview use. This page has none. Here's a description drawn from the intro:

```suggestion
---
orphan: true
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: "Deploy an automatic speech recognition (ASR) service with FunASR and Ray Serve behind an OpenAI-compatible transcription endpoint."
---
```

(serve-funasr-asr-tutorial)=

> # Serve a FunASR Speech Recognition Model

Reviewer: Sentence case per the style guide (`FunASR` stays capitalized as a product name). See the note in the review summary: this H1 follows a title-case pattern that a few sibling tutorials still use, so keep the title cased if you'd rather stay consistent with them.

```suggestion
# Serve a FunASR speech recognition model
```

This tutorial shows how to deploy an automatic speech recognition (ASR) service
with [FunASR](https://github.com/modelscope/FunASR) and Ray Serve. The example
exposes an OpenAI-compatible `POST /v1/audio/transcriptions` endpoint and scales
the FunASR deployment independently from the HTTP ingress.

> ## Install Dependencies

Reviewer: Sentence case per the style guide.

```suggestion
## Install dependencies
```

Install Ray Serve and the packages used by this example:

```bash
pip install "ray[serve]" funasr modelscope python-multipart openai
```

FunASR models can run on CPU, but GPU replicas are recommended for production
traffic. The example requests one GPU per ASR replica. If you want to try the
example on a CPU-only machine, remove `ray_actor_options={"num_gpus": 1}` from
the `FunASRModel` deployment in the code.

> ## Define the Serve Application

Reviewer: Sentence case per the style guide (`Serve` stays capitalized as a Ray component).

```suggestion
## Define the Serve application
```

Save the following code to a file named `funasr_asr.py`:

```{literalinclude} ../doc_code/funasr_asr.py
:language: python
:start-after: __example_code_start__
:end-before: __example_code_end__
```

The application has two deployments:

1. `OpenAICompatibleIngress` accepts multipart form uploads at `/v1/audio/transcriptions`.

> 2. `FunASRModel` loads FunASR models and runs batched ASR inference. Serve can

Reviewer: Nit: the style guide numbers every ordered-list item `1.` and lets MyST auto-number, so inserting or reordering a step stays a one-line edit.

```suggestion
1. `FunASRModel` loads FunASR models and runs batched ASR inference. Serve can
```

   autoscale this deployment separately from the ingress deployment.

The ingress deployment is lightweight, so the example keeps one to two ingress

> replicas and allows each replica to queue more concurrent requests. The ASR

Reviewer: The style guide steers away from `allows`/`lets`/`enables` toward what the reader or the component actually does.

```suggestion
replicas, with each replica handling more concurrent requests. The ASR
```

deployment owns the GPU and is the bottleneck, so it uses more conservative
concurrency: `max_ongoing_requests=8`, `target_ongoing_requests=4`, and
`@serve.batch(max_batch_size=4, batch_wait_timeout_s=0.1)`. This keeps
`max_ongoing_requests` high enough for a full batch while avoiding too many
simultaneous GPU-bound requests per replica. Tune these values with the
benchmark below for your model, GPU, and audio duration distribution.

The default model is `iic/SenseVoiceSmall`. The example restricts requests to a
preconfigured model allowlist to avoid loading arbitrary models. Requests pass
the selected model as a Serve multiplexed model ID, and `FunASRModel` uses
`@serve.multiplexed(max_num_models_per_replica=1)` so Serve handles model
affinity and LRU eviction instead of using an unbounded per-replica cache. To
serve additional FunASR models, add their model names to `ALLOWED_MODELS` and
pass one of those names in the multipart `model` field.

> ## Run the Service

Reviewer: Sentence case per the style guide.

```suggestion
## Run the service
```

Start the Serve application:

```bash
serve run funasr_asr:entrypoint
```

The first request downloads the configured FunASR model, so it may take longer
than later requests.

> ## Query the Endpoint

Reviewer: Sentence case per the style guide.

```suggestion
## Query the endpoint
```

Send an audio file with the OpenAI Python client:

```python
from openai import OpenAI

client = OpenAI(base_url="http://127.0.0.1:8000/v1", api_key="not-needed")

with open("audio.wav", "rb") as audio_file:
    transcription = client.audio.transcriptions.create(
        model="iic/SenseVoiceSmall",
        file=audio_file,
        response_format="json",
    )

print(transcription.text)
```

You can also use `curl`:

```bash
curl http://127.0.0.1:8000/v1/audio/transcriptions \
    -F "model=iic/SenseVoiceSmall" \
    -F "file=@audio.wav" \
    -F "response_format=json"
```

Set `response_format=text` to return plain transcript text, or
`response_format=verbose_json` to include FunASR segment metadata when the
selected model returns it.

> ## Benchmark the Deployment

Reviewer: Sentence case per the style guide (`deployment` is a generic Ray concept, so lowercase).

```suggestion
## Benchmark the deployment
```

from openai import OpenAI

def transcribe(client, path, model):
    start = time.perf_counter()
    with open(path, "rb") as audio_file:
        client.audio.transcriptions.create(
            model=model,
            file=audio_file,
            response_format="json",
        )
    return time.perf_counter() - start

def main():
    parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
    parser.add_argument("audio", nargs="+")
    parser.add_argument("--concurrency", type=int, default=8)
    parser.add_argument("--requests-per-file", type=int, default=10)
    parser.add_argument("--model", default="iic/SenseVoiceSmall")
    args = parser.parse_args()

    client = OpenAI(base_url="http://127.0.0.1:8000/v1", api_key="not-needed")

    for path in args.audio:
        work = [path] * args.requests_per_file
        start = time.perf_counter()
        with ThreadPoolExecutor(max_workers=args.concurrency) as pool:
            futures = [pool.submit(transcribe, client, item, args.model) for item in work]
            latencies = [future.result() for future in as_completed(futures)]
        elapsed = time.perf_counter() - start
        p50 = statistics.median(latencies)

>         p95 = statistics.quantiles(latencies, n=20)[18]

Reviewer 2: I reproduced the exact expression before changing the example. This finding is not valid for the documented default: Python `statistics.quantiles(data, n=20)` does **not** require 20 observations; it requires at least two. On the branch environment (Python 3.12.3), `statistics.quantiles([1.0, ..., 10.0], n=20)[18]` returns `10.45`, so the default `--requests-per-file=10` and the documented command complete normally. Counts 0 or 1 are a separate CLI-input edge case, but they are not the reported/default path. I am leaving the benchmark unchanged rather than adding a workaround for a false positive.
